The President:
This weekend marks the fourth anniversary of Hurricane
Katrina's devastation
of the Gulf Coast.
As we remember
all that was lost,
we must take stock of the
work being done on recovery,
while preparing for
future disasters.
That's what I want to
speak with you about today.
None of us can forget how we
felt when those winds battered
the shore, the
floodwaters began to rise,
and Americans were stranded
on rooftops and in stadiums.
Over a thousand people
would lose their lives.
Over a million people
were displaced.
Whole neighborhoods of a great
American city were left in ruins.
Communities across the Gulf
Coast were forever changed.
And many Americans questioned
whether government could fulfill
its responsibilities
to respond in a crisis,
or contribute to a recovery that
covered parts of four states.
Since taking office in January,
my Administration has focused on
helping citizens finish the work
of rebuilding their lives and
communities, while taking steps
to prevent similar catastrophes
going forward.
Our approach is simple:
government must keep its
responsibility to the people,
so that Americans have the
opportunity to take responsibility for their own future.
That's the work
that we're doing.
To date, eleven members of my
Cabinet have visited the Gulf
Coast, and I'm looking forward
to going to New Orleans later this year.
To complete a complex recovery
that addresses nearly every
sector of society, we've
prioritized coordination among
different federal agencies,
and with state and local governments.
No more turf wars -- all of us need to move forward together,
because there's much
more work to be done.
I've also made it clear that we will not tolerate the red tape
that stands in the
way of progress,
or the waste that can
drive up the bill.
Government must be a partner
-- not an opponent --
in getting things done.
That's why we've put in place
innovative review and dispute
resolution programs to
expedite recovery efforts,
and have freed up hundreds of
millions of dollars of federal
assistance that had
not been distributed.
This is also allowing us to move
forward with stalled projects
across the Gulf Coast -- building and improving schools;
investing in public
health and safety;
and repairing broken
roads, bridges and homes.
And this effort has been
dramatically amplified by the
Recovery Act, which has
put thousands of Gulf Coast
residents to work.
As we complete this effort,
we see countless stories of
citizens holding up
their end of the bargain.
In New Orleans, hundreds of kids
just started the school year at
Langston Hughes elementary, the
first school built from scratch
since Katrina.
The St. Bernard Project has
drawn together volunteers to
rebuild hundreds of homes, where
people can live with dignity and security.
To cite just one
hopeful indicator,
New Orleans is the fastest
growing city in America,
as many who've been
displaced are now coming home.
As we rebuild and recover, we
must also learn the lessons of
Katrina, so that our nation is
more protected and resilient in
the face of disaster.
That means continuing to rebuild
hundreds of miles of levees and
floodwalls around New Orleans,
and working to strengthen the
wetlands and barrier islands
that are the Gulf Coast's first
line of defense.
In Washington, that means
a focus on competence and
accountability -- and I'm proud that my FEMA Administrator has
25 years of experience in disaster management in Florida,
a state that has known
its share of hurricanes.
And across the country, that
means improving coordination
among different agencies,
modernizing our emergency
communications, and helping
families plan for a crisis.
On this anniversary, we are
focused on the threat from hurricanes.
But we must also be prepared
for a broad range of dangers --
from wildfires to earthquakes,
to terrorist attacks and
pandemic disease.
In particular, my Administration
is working aggressively with
state and local governments -- and with partners around the
world -- to prepare for the
risk posed by the H1N1 virus.
To learn more about the simple
steps that you can take to keep
you and your family safe
from all of these dangers,
please visit www.ready.gov.
So on this day, we commemorate a
tragedy that befell our people.
But we also remember that with
every tragedy comes the chance
of renewal.
It's a quintessentially
American notion --
that adversity can
give birth to hope,
and that the lessons of the past
hold the key to a better future.
From the streets of New Orleans
to the Mississippi Coast,
folks are beginning the next
chapter in their American stories.
And together, we can ensure that
the legacy of a terrible storm
is a country that is safer and
more prepared for the challenges
that may come.
Thank you.